 Health Conditions 
Discover 
Plan 
Connect 
Subscribe 
Please accept our privacy policy
Healthline uses cookies to improve your experience and to show you personalized ads. Privacy Policy.
ACCEPT More information
Nutrition Evidence Based 
16 Foods to Eat on a Ketogenic Diet
Written by Franziska Spritzler — Medically reviewed by Amy Richter, RD — Updated on October 16, 2020 
We include products we think are useful for our readers. If you buy through links on this page, we may earn a small commission. Here’s our process.
This video file cannot be played.(Error Code: 102630)
The ketogenic diet has become popular.
Studies have found that this very low carb, high fat diet is effective for weight loss, diabetes, and epilepsy (
1 Trusted Source , 
2 Trusted Source , 
3 Trusted Source ). 
There’s also early evidence to show that it may be beneficial for certain cancers, Alzheimer’s disease, and other diseases, too. 
Still, higher quality research on the diet is still needed to determine its long-term safety and efficacy (
1 Trusted Source , 
4 Trusted Source , 
5 Trusted Source ).
A ketogenic diet typically limits carbs to 20 to 50 grams per day. While this may seem challenging, many nutritious foods can easily fit into this way of eating.
Here are some healthy foods to eat on a ketogenic diet.
1. Seafood
Fish and shellfish are very keto-friendly foods. Salmon and other fish are rich in B vitamins, potassium, and selenium, yet virtually carb-free (
6 Trusted Source ). 
However, the carbs in different types of shellfish vary. For instance, while shrimp and most crabs contain no carbs, other types of shellfish do (
7 Trusted Source , 
8 Trusted Source ). 
While these shellfish can still be included on a ketogenic diet, it’s important to account for these carbs when you’re trying to stay within a narrow range.
clams: 4 grams
mussels: 4 grams
octopus: 4 grams
oysters: 3 grams
squid: 3 grams
Salmon, sardines, mackerel, and other fatty fish are very high in omega-3 fats, which have been found to lower insulin levels and increase insulin sensitivity in people who have overweight and obesity (
14 Trusted Source ).
In addition, frequent fish intake has been linked to a decreased risk of disease and improved cognitive health (
14 Trusted Source , 
15 Trusted Source ).
The American Heart Association recommends consuming 1 to 2 seafood meals every week (
16 Trusted Source ).
Summary
Many types of seafood are carb-free or very low in carbs. Fish and shellfish are also good sources of vitamins, minerals, and omega-3s.
2. Low-carb vegetables
Non-starchy vegetables are low in calories and carbs, but high in many nutrients, including vitamin C and several minerals.
Vegetables and other plants contain fiber, which your body doesn’t digest and absorb like other carbs. 
Therefore, look at their digestible (or net) carb count, which is total carbs minus fiber. The term “net carbs” simply refers to carbs that are absorbed by the body. 
Note that net carbs and their effects on the body are somewhat controversial, and more research is needed. 
Many vegetables contain very few net carbs. However, consuming one serving of “starchy” vegetables like potatoes, yams, or beets could put you over your entire carb limit for the day. 
The net carb count for non-starchy vegetables ranges from less than 1 gram for 1 cup of raw spinach to 7 grams for 1 cup of cooked Brussels sprouts (
17 Trusted Source , 
18 Trusted Source ).
Vegetables also contain antioxidants that help protect against free radicals, which are unstable molecules that can cause cell damage (
19 Trusted Source , 20).
What’s more, cruciferous vegetables like kale, broccoli, and cauliflower have been linked to decreased cancer and heart disease risk (
21 Trusted Source , 
22 Trusted Source ).
Low carb veggies make great substitutes for higher carb foods. 
For instance:
cauliflower can be used to mimic rice or mashed potatoes 
“zoodles” can be created from zucchini 
spaghetti squash is a natural substitute for spaghetti 
Here are some examples of keto-friendly vegetables to include in your eating plan.
Keto vegetable list:
asparagus
avocado
broccoli
cabbage
cauliflower
cucumber
green beans
eggplant
kale
lettuce
olives
peppers (especially green)
spinach
tomatoes
zucchini
Summary
The net carbs in non-starchy vegetables range from 1 to 8 grams per cup. Vegetables are nutritious, versatile, and may help reduce the risk of disease.
3. Cheese
There are hundreds of types of cheese. Fortunately, most are very low in carbs and high in fat, which makes them a great fit for a ketogenic diet.
One ounce (28 grams) of cheddar cheese provides 1 gram of carbs, 6.5 grams of protein, and a good amount of calcium (
23 Trusted Source ).
Cheese is high in saturated fat, but it hasn’t been shown to increase the risk of heart disease. In fact, some studies suggest that cheese may help protect against heart disease (
24 Trusted Source , 
25 Trusted Source ).
Cheese also contains conjugated linoleic acid, which is a fat that has been linked to fat loss and improvements in body composition (26).
In addition, eating cheese regularly may help reduce the loss of muscle mass and strength that occurs with aging.
A 12-week study in older adults found that those who consumed 7 ounces (210 grams) of ricotta cheese per day experienced less muscle mass and muscle strength loss over the course of the study than others (
27 Trusted Source ). 
Here are some cheeses that are lower in carbs for a keto diet.
Keto cheese list:
blue cheese
brie
camembert
cheddar
chevre
colby jack
cottage cheese
cream cheese
feta
goat cheese
halloumi
Havarti
Limburger
manchego
mascarpone
mozzarella
muenster
parmesan
pepper jack
provalone
romano
string cheese
Swiss
Summary
Cheese is rich in protein, calcium, and beneficial fatty acids, yet contains a minimal amount of carbs.
4. Avocados
Avocados are incredibly healthy; 3.5 ounces (100 grams), or about one-half of a medium avocado, contain 9 grams of carbs. 
However, 7 of these are fiber, so its net carb count is only 2 grams (
28 Trusted Source ).
Avocados are high in several vitamins and minerals, including potassium, an important mineral many people may not get enough of. What’s more, a higher potassium intake may help make the transition to a ketogenic diet easier (
29 Trusted Source ).
In addition, avocados may help improve cholesterol and triglyceride levels.
One study found that participants eating one avocado per day had beneficial effects for their cardio‐metabolic risk factors including lower levels of LDL (bad) cholesterol. (
30 Trusted Source ).
Summary
Avocados contain 2 grams of net carbs per serving and are high in fiber and several nutrients, including potassium. In addition, they may help improve heart health markers.
5. Meat and poultry
Meat and poultry are considered staple foods on a ketogenic diet.
Fresh meat and poultry contain no carbs and are rich in B vitamins and several important minerals (
31 Trusted Source , 
32 Trusted Source ).
They’re also a great source of high-quality protein, which has been shown to help preserve muscle mass during a very low carb diet (
33 Trusted Source , 
34 Trusted Source ).
One study in older women found that consuming a diet high in fatty meat led to HDL (good) cholesterol levels that were 5% higher than on a low fat, high carb diet (
24 Trusted Source ).
It’s best to choose grass-fed meat, if possible. That’s because animals that eat grass produce meat with higher amounts of omega-3 fats, conjugated linoleic acid, and antioxidants than meat from grain-fed animals (
35 Trusted Source ). 
Summary
Meat and poultry do not contain carbs and are rich in high-quality protein and several nutrients. Grass-fed meat is the healthiest choice.
6. Eggs
Eggs are one of the healthiest and most versatile foods on the planet.
One large egg contains less than 1 gram of carbs and about 6 grams of protein, making eggs an ideal food for a ketogenic lifestyle (
36 Trusted Source ).
In addition, eggs have been shown to trigger hormones that increase feelings of fullness and satiety (
37 Trusted Source , 
38 Trusted Source ).
It’s important to eat the entire egg, as most of an egg’s nutrients are found in the yolk. This includes the antioxidants lutein and zeaxanthin, which help protect eye health (
39 Trusted Source ). 
Although egg yolks are high in cholesterol, consuming them doesn’t raise blood cholesterol levels in most people. In fact, eggs appear to modify the size of LDL particles in a way that reduces the risk of heart disease (
40 Trusted Source ). 
Summary
Eggs contain less than 1 gram of carbs each and can help keep you full for hours. They’re also high in several nutrients and may help protect eye and heart health.
7. Coconut oil
Coconut oil has unique properties that make it well suited for a ketogenic diet.
To begin with, it contains medium-chain triglycerides (MCTs). Unlike long-chain fats, MCTs are taken up directly by the liver and converted into ketones or used as a rapid source of energy.
In fact, coconut oil has been used to increase ketone levels in people with Alzheimer’s disease and other disorders of the brain and nervous system (
41 Trusted Source ).
The main fatty acid in coconut oil is lauric acid, a slightly longer-chain fat. It has been suggested that coconut oil’s mix of MCTs and lauric acid may promote a sustained level of ketosis (
42 Trusted Source , 
43 Trusted Source ).
What’s more, coconut oil may help adults with obesity lose weight and belly fat. 
In one study, men who ate 2 tablespoons (30 mL) of coconut oil per day lost 1 inch (2.5 cm), on average, from their waistlines without making any other dietary changes (
44 Trusted Source , 
45 Trusted Source ).
For more information about how to add coconut oil to your diet, read this article. 
Summary
Coconut oil is rich in MCTs, which can increase ketone production. In addition, it may increase metabolic rate and promote the loss of weight and belly fat.
HEALTHLINE CHALLENGE
Add mood-boosting food to your diet
Learn how food affects your mood. Get tips, tools, and healthy recipes in the Mood Foods Challenge.
Enter your email
JOIN IN 
Get Healthline's daily Nutrition newsletter 
Your privacy is important to us
8. Plain Greek yogurt and cottage cheese
Plain Greek yogurt and cottage cheese are healthy, high protein foods.
While they contain some carbs, they can still be included in a ketogenic lifestyle in moderation.
A half cup (105 grams) of plain Greek yogurt provides 4 grams of carbs and 9 grams of protein. That amount of cottage cheese provides 5 grams of carbs and 11 grams of protein (
46 Trusted Source , 
47 Trusted Source ).
Both yogurt and cottage cheese have been shown to help decrease appetite and promote feelings of fullness (
48 Trusted Source , 
49 Trusted Source ).
Either one makes a tasty snack on its own. However, both can also be combined with chopped nuts, cinnamon, or other spices for a quick and easy keto treat.
Summary
Both plain Greek yogurt and cottage cheese contain 5 grams of carbs per serving. Studies have shown that they help reduce appetite and promote fullness.
9. Olive oil
Olive oil provides impressive benefits for your heart.
It’s high in oleic acid, a monounsaturated fat that has been found to decrease heart disease risk factors in many studies (
50 Trusted Source , 
51 Trusted Source ).
In addition, extra-virgin olive oil is high in antioxidants known as phenols. These compounds further protect heart health by decreasing inflammation and improving artery function (
52 Trusted Source , 
53 Trusted Source ).
As a pure fat source, olive oil contains no carbs. It’s an ideal base for salad dressings and healthy mayonnaise.
Because it isn’t as stable as saturated fats at high temperatures, it’s best to use olive oil for low-heat cooking or add it to foods after they’ve been cooked. 
Summary
Extra-virgin olive oil is high in heart-healthy monounsaturated fats and antioxidants. It’s ideal for salad dressings, mayonnaise, and adding to cooked foods.
10. Nuts and seeds
Nuts and seeds are healthy, high fat, and low-carb foods.
Frequent nut consumption has been linked to a reduced risk of heart disease, certain cancers, depression, and other chronic diseases (
54 Trusted Source , 55).
Furthermore, nuts and seeds are high in fiber, which can help you feel full and absorb fewer calories overall (
56 Trusted Source ).
Although all nuts and seeds are low in net carbs, the amount varies quite a bit among the different types.
almonds: 2 grams net carbs (6 grams total carbs)
Brazil nuts: 1 gram net carbs (3 grams total carbs)
cashews: 8 grams net carbs (9 grams total carbs)
macadamia nuts: 2 grams net carbs (4 grams total carbs)
pecans: 2 grams net carbs (4 grams total carbs)
pistachios: 5 grams net carbs (8 grams total carbs)
walnuts: 2 grams net carbs (4 grams total carbs)
chia seeds: 1 gram net carbs (12 grams total carbs)
flaxseeds: 0 grams net carbs (8 grams total carbs)
pumpkin seeds: 3 grams net carbs (5 grams total carbs)
sesame seeds: 3 grams net carbs (7 grams total carbs)
Summary
Nuts and seeds are heart-healthy, high in fiber, and may lead to healthier aging. They provide 0 to 8 grams of net carbs per ounce.
11. Berries
Most fruits are too high in carbs to include on a ketogenic diet, but berries are an exception.
Berries are low in carbs and high in fiber. In fact, raspberries and blackberries contain as much fiber as digestible carbs.
These tiny fruits are loaded with antioxidants that have been credited with reducing inflammation and protecting against disease (
68 Trusted Source , 
69 Trusted Source , 
70 Trusted Source ).
blackberries: 11 grams net carbs (16 grams total carbs)
blueberries: 9 grams net carbs (12 grams total carbs)
raspberries: 6 grams net carbs (12 grams total carbs)
strawberries: 7 grams net carbs (9 grams total carbs)
Summary
Berries are rich in nutrients that may reduce the risk of disease. They provide 5 to 12 grams of net carbs per 3.5-ounce serving.
12. Butter and cream
Butter and cream are good fats to include on a ketogenic diet. Each contains only trace amounts of carbs per serving (
75 Trusted Source , 
76 Trusted Source ).
For many years, butter and cream were believed to cause or contribute to heart disease due to their high saturated fat contents. However, several large studies have shown that, for most people, saturated fat isn’t linked to heart disease (
77 Trusted Source , 
78 Trusted Source ).
In fact, some studies suggest that a moderate consumption of high fat dairy may possibly reduce the risk of heart attack and stroke (
79 Trusted Source , 
80 Trusted Source , 
81 Trusted Source ).
Like other fatty dairy products, butter and cream are rich in conjugated linoleic acid, the fatty acid that may promote fat loss (30).
Summary
Butter and cream are nearly carb-free and appear to have neutral or beneficial effects on heart health when consumed in moderation.
13. Shirataki noodles
Shirataki noodles are a fantastic addition to a ketogenic diet. You can find them near the produce at grocery stores or online.
They contain less than 1 gram of net carbs and 15 calories per serving because they’re mainly water (
82 Trusted Source ). 
In fact, these noodles are made from a viscous fiber called glucomannan, which can absorb up to 50 times its weight in water (
83 Trusted Source ).
Viscous fiber forms a gel that slows down food’s movement through your digestive tract. This can help decrease hunger and blood sugar spikes, making it beneficial for weight loss and diabetes management (
84 Trusted Source , 
85 Trusted Source , 
86 Trusted Source ).
Shirataki noodles come in a variety of shapes, including rice, fettuccine, and linguine. They can be substituted for regular noodles in all types of recipes. 
Summary
Shirataki noodles contain less than 1 gram of carbs per serving. Their viscous fiber helps slow down the movement of food through your digestive tract, which promotes fullness and stable blood sugar levels.
14. Olives
Olives provide the same health benefits as olive oil, only in solid form.
Oleuropein, the main antioxidant found in olives, has anti-inflammatory properties and may protect your cells from damage (
87 Trusted Source ).
In addition, in vitro studies suggest that consuming olives may help prevent bone loss and decrease blood pressure, though no human trials are available yet (
88 Trusted Source , 
89 Trusted Source ).
Olives vary in carb content due to their size. However, half of their carbs come from fiber, so their digestible carb content is very low. 
Ten olives (34 grams) contain 2 grams of total carbs and 1 gram of fiber. This works out to a net carb count of about 1 gram depending on the size (
90 Trusted Source ).
Summary
Olives are rich in antioxidants that may help protect heart and bone health. They contain 1 gram of net carbs per ounce.
15. Unsweetened coffee and tea
Coffee and tea are healthy, carb-free drinks.
They contain caffeine, which increases your metabolism and may help improve your physical performance, alertness, and mood (
91 Trusted Source , 
92 Trusted Source , 
93 Trusted Source ).
What’s more, coffee and tea drinkers have been shown to have a significantly reduced risk of diabetes. In fact, those with the highest coffee intake have the lowest risk for developing diabetes (
94 Trusted Source ).
Adding heavy cream to coffee or tea is fine but stay away from “light” coffee and tea lattes. These are typically made with nonfat milk and contain high carb flavorings.
Summary
Unsweetened coffee and tea contain no carbs and can help boost your metabolic rate, as well as physical and mental performance. They can also reduce your risk for diabetes.
16. Dark chocolate and cocoa powder
Dark chocolate and cocoa are delicious sources of antioxidants.
In fact, cocoa provides at least as much antioxidant activity as any other fruit, including blueberries and acai berries (
95 Trusted Source ).
Dark chocolate contains flavanols, which may help reduce the risk of heart disease by lowering blood pressure and keeping arteries healthy (96, 97, 98).
Somewhat surprisingly, chocolate can be part of a ketogenic diet. However, it’s important to choose dark chocolate that contains a minimum of 70% cocoa solids, preferably more, and eat in moderation.
One ounce (28 grams) of unsweetened chocolate (100% cocoa) has 3 grams of net carbs (
99 Trusted Source ).
Summary
Dark chocolate and cocoa powder are high in antioxidants and may help reduce the risk of heart disease.
The bottom line
A ketogenic diet can be used to achieve weight loss, blood sugar management, and other health-related goals.
Fortunately, it can include a wide variety of nutritious, tasty, and versatile foods that allow you to remain within your daily carb range.
To reap all the health benefits of a ketogenic diet, consume keto-friendly foods on a regular basis.
ADVERTISEMENT
Curious about low carb eating? 
Sunbasket has you covered with its carb-conscious meal plan. Stop counting macros and start enjoying dietitian-approved, high protein recipes, delivered straight to your door.
LEARN MORE 
Last medically reviewed on October 15, 2020 
FEEDBACK:
Written by Franziska Spritzler — Medically reviewed by Amy Richter, RD — Updated on October 16, 2020 
Mediterranean Diet 101: A Meal Plan and Beginner’s Guide
The Best Indian Diet Plan for Weight Loss
The Ketogenic Diet: A Detailed Beginner’s Guide to Keto
Vegetarian Diets May Be Even Better for Us Than We Thought
The Atkins Diet: Everything You Need to Know
Was this article helpful?
YesNo
Read this next
Is Hummus Keto-Friendly? Carbs, Substitutes, and More
Written by SaVanna Shoemaker, MS, RDN, LD 
Hummus is a popular snack, but the chickpeas used to make it pack a lot of carbs. This article explains whether you can eat hummus on the keto diet.
READ MORE
TikTokers Are Eating Frozen Honey — Here’s What Nutritionists Think
A new TikTok trend has erupted in which people are consuming frozen honey. When people consume high doses of sugar, their blood sugar levels can spike…
READ MORE
Is Apple Cider Vinegar Keto-Friendly?
Written by SaVanna Shoemaker, MS, RDN, LD 
If you follow the keto diet, you may be interested in apple cider vinegar (ACV) as a supplement or ingredient in your cooking. This article reviews…
READ MORE
Cutting Out 200 Calories a Day and Exercising Can Help You Stay Heart Healthy
According to a new study, taking steps to eat fewer calories and working out daily can help your heart health, whether or not you lose weight.
READ MORE
10 Food Substitutes for the Military Diet
Written by Soniya Nikam, MS, RD 
The military diet is a strict weight loss plan, so many people are interested in food swaps. Here are numerous food substitutions for the military…
READ MORE
Is Allulose Keto-Friendly?
Written by Gavin Van De Walle, MS, RD 
Allulose is a sweetener that's derived from fruits. This article explains whether you can use allulose on the keto diet.
READ MORE
Can You Eat Peanut Butter on the Keto Diet?
Written by SaVanna Shoemaker, MS, RDN, LD 
Nut butters are common choices on the keto diet because they're high in fat and protein. This article explains whether peanut butter is keto-friendly.
READ MORE
myWW+ Diet Review: Does It Work for Weight Loss?
Written by Jillian Kubala, MS, RD and SaVanna Shoemaker, MS, RDN, LD 
Millions of people have joined WW (formerly Weight Watchers) hoping to lose pounds. This article investigates whether the diet really works.
READ MORE
Jennifer Aniston’s Diet and Fitness Routine, Explained
Written by Rachael Link, MS, RD 
Jennifer Aniston credits her youthful appearance and fit physique to diet and exercise. This article reviews the Jennifer Aniston diet and fitness…
READ MORE
Get our wellness newsletter
Filter out the noise and nurture your inbox with health and wellness advice that’s inclusive and rooted in medical expertise.
SIGN UP 
Your privacy is important to us
Health Topics
Medical Affairs
Content Integrity
Newsletters
Do Not Sell My Info
© 2005-2021 Healthline Media a Red Ventures Company. All rights reserved. Our website services, content, and products are for informational purposes only. Healthline Media does not provide medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. See additional information.
© 2005-2021 Healthline Media a Red Ventures Company. All rights reserved. Our website services, content, and products are for informational purposes only. Healthline Media does not provide medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. See additional information.