Marketplace
Best Keto Diet Pills: Top Ketone Supplements For Weight Loss
Norcal Marketing 
Aug. 4, 2021 
(ad) Keto diet pills are a type of weight loss supplement that helps your body enter ketosis, a state in which your body is encouraged to burn fat for energy instead of carbs. 
The best keto diet pills contain exogenous ketones that can help you lose weight faster, increase energy levels, and improve mental clarity. Keto pills can also help you bypass the dreaded “keto flu” that most ketogenic dieters experience after eliminating carbs from their diet.
However, not all keto pills are created equal. It’s important that you only buy keto supplements from reputable brands. The last thing you need is to spend your hard-earned money on a low-quality keto pill that doesn’t work as well as promised.
Luckily, we’ve reviewed all of the top keto diet pills on the market to see which ones are the most effective. We analyzed the best keto diet supplements on the market on factors such as ingredients, potency, reviews, price, and refund policy.
If you’re ready to experience powerful weight loss results from the keto diet, here are the best keto pills on the market.
2021’s Best Keto Diet Pills for Weight Loss
#1 KetoCharge
KetoCharge is a ketogenic diet supplement that helps your body enter ketosis faster than diet alone would allow. These keto diet pills contain β-Hydroxybutyrate (beta-hydroxybutyrate or BHB), a substrate that kicks your body into a state of ketosis and tells it to burn fat for energy. BHB can cross the blood-brain barrier more easily than other energy sources, allowing your body to utilize it for fuel over other substances.
Ideally, following a cyclical ketogenic diet would encourage your liver to produce BHB itself, but many people struggle to stick to the diet's strict rules long enough to reach a ketogenic state on their own. KetoCharge provides your body with the additional ketones it needs to reach ketosis.
When your body enters the metabolic state of ketosis, it has access to fewer carbohydrates and learns to use fat for fuel instead. KetoCharge helps you enter ketosis faster and maintain the ketogenic state to lose the most weight over time.
Taking KetoCharge can help you:
Release Fat Stores 
Increase Energy Naturally 
Burn Fat for Energy, Not Carbs 
Achieve Your Weight Loss Goals 
KetoCharge is one of the best keto diet pills on the market. If you need help sticking to a ketogenic diet and maintaining ketosis, consider giving these tried-and-true supplements a shot.
Click Here for the Lowest Price on KetoCharge
#2 OneShot Keto
OneShot Keto is a keto diet pill that gives your body the extra BHB it needs to enter a ketogenic state. Consuming higher levels of BHB allows your body to use the substrate for energy instead of carbohydrates or sugars, helping your body enter a state of ketosis faster.
This supplement's creators know that achieving ketosis on your own can take weeks of hard work and strict dieting. OneShot Keto takes some of the effort out of sticking to a ketogenic diet by kickstarting your metabolic rates and telling your body to burn ketones. As a result, you will lose weight faster and more efficiently while taking this supplement.
Pairing OneShot Keto with a high-fat diet can give your body the boost it needs to start burning fat instead of carbohydrates. It can also help you:
Accelerate Fat Burning Results 
Boost Mental Clarity 
Improve Energy Levels 
Stay in Ketosis Longer 
The creators of OneShot Keto recommend taking the supplement daily for three to five months, even after you have achieved your weight loss goals, in order to stabilize your appetite and help you maintain your new weight.
OneShot Keto boasts that users can lose 5 pounds in the first week of use. While your weight loss may not be as dramatic, you can expect this product to help you stick to a keto diet and burn fat quickly.
Click Here for the Lowest Price on OneShot Keto
#3 Keto Super Powder
Keto Super Powder is a ketogenic supplement that contains a blend of powerful ingredients to help your body burn fat. The product takes a dual-action approach to fat-burning by targeting blood-ketone levels and regulating your digestion. As a result, some customers consider Keto Super Powder more effective than other ketogenic supplements.
One of the supplement's most effective ingredients is fresh extra-virgin olive oil, a healthy fat that provides your body with nutrients like Omega-6, Omega-3, and Vitamin E. Supplementing your diet with these essential fats helps you feel more energetic and boosts weight loss.
Keto Super Powder also contains powerful prebiotics that promote gut health and help your body produce beneficial microorganisms to aid digestion. Taking this product will help you feel better overall as you adjust to the new foods and nutrients that the keto diet gives you.
Unlike other keto supplements, Keto Super Powder does not advertise that it contains beta-hydroxybutyrate. However, its blend of unique nutrients and prebiotics will help your body burn fat and aid the ketosis process. Taking this supplement will also allow you to:
Burn Fat Faster Than Ever 
Use Fat as an Energy Source 
Improve Digestion 
Enhance Mental Clarity 
Keto Super Powder boosts the fat-burning processes that are necessary to maintain a ketogenic diet.
Click Here for the Lowest Price on Keto Super Powder
What is Keto BHB?
Beta-hydroxybutyrate (BHB) is one of three ketones that your body produces to supply energy while in a state of fasting. When you follow the ketogenic diet, the ketone levels in your blood increase to compensate for your decreased carbohydrate intake. As a result, your body uses BHB as an energy source instead of carbs.
Many people take keto pills that contain exogenous ketones like BHB to avoid following the strict rules of the ketogenic diet. Taking these exogenous ketonesin pill form provides some of the same benefits of achieving ketosis without requiring you to change your diet. However, many people also take BHB supplements alongside their keto diets to boost their ketone levels.
What to Look for in the Best Keto Supplements
The keto diet has expanded in popularity in recent years, and with this growth, an abundance of keto supplements have flooded the market. Though some of the best diet pills contain high-quality ingredients that help people achieve ketosis, others make false claims and may even be unsafe for consumption.
Here are some signs that indicate a safe, effective ketone supplement:
Positive Reviews: Many keto supplement companies promote their pills through positive customer reviews. However, you cannot always trust that these reviews are valid when they appear on a company's website. To get the best picture of customers' experiences with a particular weight loss supplement, you should Google the product name and read reviews on several websites. The supplements with the most positive reviews tend to be the highest-quality options.
Quality Ingredients: Keto supplements can contain a wide variety of ingredients, and some are of higher quality than others. Examine each supplement's nutrition label to determine if it contains natural, safe ingredients or unnecessary chemical fillers.
Clean Labels: Some weight loss supplements do not disclose all of the ingredients in their keto diet pills, instead listing just one or two essential components. This practice, known as proprietary labeling, may indicate that a company has something to hide about its ingredients. The best ketone supplements will state their contents transparently on their labels.
Realistic Claims: Ketone supplements can only do so much to assist the ketogenic diet. If a supplement claims to do all of the work for you, it is likely exaggerating its effectiveness. Look for supplements with realistic claims about how their ingredients behave in conjunction with diet and exercise.
How Do Ketone Supplements Work to Help You Lose Weight?
Ketone supplements help you lose weight in a few ways.
First, many ketone supplements contain ingredients that raise your blood's ketone levels. Some keto pills contain exogenous ketones, like BCB, which we discussed earlier. Others contain medium-chain triglycerides, or MCTs, which are saturated fats found in coconut oil.
While following a low-carb diet, your liver will break down these MCTs into ketones. Having excess saturated fat means your body burns fat before it touches carbohydrates, and MCTs have a shorter fatty acid chain than other fats, so your body can break them down more quickly.
Some ketone supplements also contain electrolytes like magnesium or sodium. Because the ketogenic diet triggers your body to release salt, consuming electrolytes hydrates your body and gives you the fuel you need to burn calories. Electrolytes also regulate your blood sugar and support brain health.
Ketone supplements may contain additional ingredients that assist weight loss but are unrelated to the standard ketogenic diet. Some keto pills include caffeine, for example, to keep your mind alert and energize you. Others contain prebiotics to support gut health as your digestive system becomes familiar with the ketogenic diet.
Overall, ketone supplements provide the boost in fat and nutrients that many people need to achieve and maintain ketosis.
Do Keto Weight Loss Pills Have Any Side Effects?
Although most keto diet pills are safe to consume, some people do experience minor side effects when taking these supplements.
The most common side effects of keto weight loss pills are nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, and constipation. Users have also reported a poor aftertaste after swallowing the pills.
However, because keto diet pills contain mostly natural ingredients, they produce fewer side effects than prescription weight loss pills. The best way to avoid adverse effects is to take the recommended dosage per day and follow the product's instructions.
The Ingredients Inside BHB Keto Capsules
BHB keto pills contain a variety of ingredients that assist the ketogenic diet and help with weight management. Aside from exogenous ketones, a few prevalent ingredients in keto BHB supplements include:
Green Tea: Green tea is one of the most effective fat burners you can find in many dietary supplements. Consuming this ingredient can boost your metabolism, give you energy, and assist weight loss.
Olive Oil: Olive oil is high in monounsaturated fats, which are nutrients the body needs to stay in ketosis. Olive oil also contains high levels of antioxidants, which assist in the absorption of other vitamins and nutrients.
Fish Oil: Fish oil is rich in Omega-3s, which are fatty acids that boost your fat intake on the ketogenic diet. This ingredient also supports joint health to aid workouts, prevents brain fog, and reduces inflammation.
MCT Oil: Medium-chain triglycerides aid ketosis while on the ketogenic diet, and MCT oil provides the right balance of this fat to maximize benefits. Taking ketone supplements with MCT oil can also energize you and stabilize your appetite.
Sodium: Sodium is one of several electrolytes that many dietary supplements include in their formulas. Adding electrolytes to your diet can offset the excess salt that you produce while in ketosis.
While exogenous ketones like BCB are primary ingredients in many keto diet pills, these additional nutrients and oils can also aid the keto diet.
How to Take Keto Pills for the Best Results
Each keto diet pill specifies the proper dosage of the supplement and the schedule on which to take it. Some companies recommend taking two keto boost pills per day for 30 days. Other keto pills say you need to take the supplements long-term to see the best results.
Research studies suggest that keto diet pills are most effective when you take them on an empty stomach, such as in the morning before breakfast. However, you should always make sure to follow the directions on your product's label and be careful not to overdose.
How to Avoid Keto Diet Supplement Scams
Although there are many excellent ketone diet supplements, not all keto pills are created equal. Unfortunately, some companies want to capitalize on the popularity of ketone supplements by creating cheap, ineffective pills that scam customers out of their money.
Keep an eye out for these warning signs that a supplement may be a scam.
“Free” Trials
Ketone supplement companies often provide customers with "free" trials to entice them to purchase their keto diet pills. However, these companies may make the trial terms unclear and rope customers into paying the full price after the trial ends. If a company advertises a free trial of its supplements, it may be a scam.
Some companies may provide free bottles of their ketone supplements as a bonus with the purchase of a specific number of bottles. These companies tend to be safer and more reliable than those that offer flat-out "free" trials.
Fake Keto BHB Reviews
The ketogenic diet is popular among celebrities and social media influencers, and some keto diet pill companies use celebrity endorsements to advertise their products. However, many of the keto diet pill reviews from celebrities are fake and do not actually represent celebrities' views.
If a supplement's celebrity reviews seem suspicious, they are probably fake, and you can assume the company is a scam.
Products Claiming to Be on Shark Tank
A few keto diet products have appeared on the NBC show Shark Tank and have gained widespread popularity as a result.
However, dozens of products falsely claim that they've appeared on the show and have gained support from sharks like Mark Cuban. If a company mentions Shark Tank in its advertising campaign without proving its appearance on the show, you can assume that it is a scam.
The Science Behind Using Keto BHB Capsules for Weight Loss
We have already discussed the benefits of taking BHB supplements within a ketogenic diet. Still, you may be wondering how these pills will affect your health and whether these claims are legitimate.
Your body needs energy to carry out its daily functions, and food is one of its primary fuel sources. Because the typical diet contains high levels of carbohydrates—molecules found in grains, fruits, and sugar—your body uses up your carbohydrate supply for energy before it begins to burn fat.
When your body has less access to carbohydrates during a diet or fasting, it changes its fuel source from glucose to fat.
Many keto diet pills contain exogenous ketones (from an external source) in the form of BHB. When you ingest exogenous ketones, these molecules signal fat-burning processes in your brain, and your body relies on the excess ketone bodies as an additional fuel source.
Supplementing your diet with exogenous ketones like BHB can also help prevent "keto flu," or the flu-like symptoms experienced by many users when beginning the standard ketogenic diet. Switching from a low-carb ketogenic diet to a high-fat diet takes some getting used to by your body, and BHB ketone salts can ease the transition and help people avoid keto flu.
Taking a keto supplement containing exogenous ketones to increase your blood ketone level can assist the ketogenic diet by increasing the ketones in your blood and easing the difficulty associated with the diet's first few days.
Do Ketosis Supplements Really Work?
Yes, ketone supplements do help you lose weight and burn fat. These supplements can speed up ketosis by raising your blood ketone levels. They can also help prevent symptoms of keto flu and help you feel healthier overall.
However, ketone supplements are most effective when you use them according to the manufacturer's instructions and pair them with a strict diet. Dozens of brands of keto pills exist on the market, and they vary in safety, reliability, and effectiveness.
Do Ketogenic Pills Work Without the Keto Diet?
Keto pills boost the exogenous ketones in your blood, which tell your body to burn ketones instead of carbs. These pills can increase your blood ketone levels regardless of whether or not you pair them with a low-carb diet.
However, even though keto BHB supplements can provide some benefits when used alone, they are much more effective when paired with the keto diet. No diet pill can produce the same effects as a healthy diet. The nutrients and vitamins in ketone pills are not the same as those found in real food, and your digestive system will not interpret them the same way.
The best way to achieve ketosis is through a low-carb, medium-protein diet. But if you cannot follow a diet well enough to increase your ketones naturally, keto diet pills may give you the boost in ketone bodies you need to get there.
How Long Does It Take for Keto Pills to Work?
Many pure keto diet pills begin working within the first week of consumption. Users have reported lower appetite and increased weight loss after just a few days of taking these pills. However, to achieve the best results, you will need to take these supplements for at least thirty days.
How Much Fat Can I Lose on a Ketogenic Diet?
Though the keto diet produces different results for everyone, many people lose one to two pounds of body fat each week of maintaining ketosis. Some people report losing an average of four to ten pounds a month while on the diet.
Are Keto Pill Supplements FDA-Approved?
The Food and Drug Administration typically does not approve dietary supplements. Therefore, most keto diet pills have not gained approval from the FDA. Because of this, it is each supplement company's responsibility to ensure that its products are safe for consumption.
Even without FDA approval, you can still feel confident in the safety of diet pills.
Final Thoughts – Are Keto Diet Pills Right for You?
Keto pills can provide significant benefits for those wanting to burn body fat and aid weight loss. These pills boost the levels of ketones in your blood that you use for energy in place of carbohydrates, helping you achieve and maintain ketosis. When your body burns fat more quickly, you can lose weight faster and achieve your weight loss goals in record time.
Keto pills will not do all of the work for you, however. In order to achieve the best results, you will need to pair ketone supplements with a strict high-fat, low-carb diet. However, many users have found that keto pills offer the boost in ketone bodies they need to stick to the diet and lose the most weight.
If you are struggling to maintain a keto diet or think you will need extra assistance getting started, ketone supplements may be an excellent solution for you.
 
*This article is provided by an advertiser. Statements made are not meant to offer medical advice nor to diagnose any condition. Any studies cited here may be preliminary, and may or may not be peer reviewed, and may or may not have sufficient participants to be statistically relevant. Anecdotal accounts should not be taken as scientific results. Products discussed in this article are not designed to diagnose, treat, prevent, or cure any disease. The FDA does not evaluate dietary supplements. Consult your doctor about possible interactions, allergies, and if you are considering using a natural and/or dietary supplements for any condition. Individual results will vary.
Written By
Norcal Marketing
The sign in service is not functioning right now.
Please try again in a few minutes
If the issues continue, please contact our customer service at
Phone: 
Email: 
Please log in to view your profile.
Sign In
Welcome back, 
Profile Settings
Sign up for newsletters, change password and more 
Activate Digital Access
Set up your free digital account 
Subscription & Billing
Place a vacation hold, make a payment and more 
Membership Center
Access your exclusive member benefits Sign Out
You must be signed in to comment
is currently signed in
Sign In 