 Skip to content 
Appointments 
Close 
Appointments
Schedule your appointment online for primary care and many specialties.
Schedule an Appointment Online
To request an appointment, please use our secure online form.
Request an Appointment
Get an online second opinion from one of our experts without having to leave your home.    Get a Second Opinion
Contact Us
Contact Form and Phone Numbers 
MyChart 
Close 
Patient Portal
MyChart (UChicago Medicine)
For help with MyChart, call us at 1-844-442-4278.
Care Connection (Ingalls)
For help with Ingalls Care Connection, call us at 1-708-915-4357 or email portalsupport@ingalls.org.
Online Bill Pay
Ingalls Memorial Bill Pay
UChicago Medicine Bill Pay 
Print 
Forefront 
Health and Wellness 
Ketogenic diet: What are the risks?
June 20, 2019
Written By Natalie Helms 
Call Us At 1-888-824-0200 
Fad diets often come with big promises of weight loss and optimum health, but at what risks? University of Chicago Medicine Ingalls Memorial dietitians say the ketogenic or keto diet, which has gained popularity in the last several years, is extremely strict and difficult to maintain.
What is the keto diet?
Rachel Kleinman, RDN, LDN, clinical dietitian at Ingalls, said the keto diet is primarily used to manage seizures in children with epilepsy. Research on the diet’s effectiveness in treating obesity or diabetes is limited.
What is ketosis?
Ketosis is a metabolic adaptation to allow the body to survive in a period of famine. Your body will break down ketone bodies, a type of fuel the liver produces from fat, instead of sugar or glucose from carbohydrates.
To achieve ketosis, the diet requires you eat 75 percent of your calories from fat, compared to 20-35 percent normally. It also requires 5 percent of calories from carbohydrates, about 20-50 grams per day, and 15 percent of calories from protein. Kleinman said it takes about 72 hours for ketosis to kick in. “It’s really an all or nothing diet,” Kleinman said.
People following the keto diet should be eating foods like fatty fish, eggs, dairy, meat, butter, oils, nuts, seeds and low-carb vegetables. “Fat bombs” like unsweetened chocolate or coconut oil can help people reach their daily goals for fat intake. Keto-compliant foods like red meats and nuts can be costly, Kleinman said. Keto-branded products like keto coffee and other supplemental products are also both costly and unnecessary.
Is the keto diet healthy?
Wellness Dietitian Mary Condon, RN, LDN, said the keto diet may result in weight loss and lower blood sugars, but it’s a quick fix. “More often than not, it’s not sustainable. Oftentimes weight gain may come back, and you’ll gain more than what you lost,” Condon said.
Condon said you should always consult your primary care doctor before starting any new diet.
What are the dangers of the keto diet?
“If you are on diabetic medication that causes low blood sugar, those meds may need to be adjusted within a few days,” Condon said. “There are heart-healthy sources of fat, however if that person is not educated on heart-healthy sources of fat, they may consume excessive amounts of saturated fats that can increase your risk of heart disease,” Condon said.
Is the keto diet safe?
The keto diet could cause low blood pressure, kidney stones, constipation, nutrient deficiencies and an increased risk of heart disease. Strict diets like keto could also cause social isolation or disordered eating. Keto is not safe for those with any conditions involving their pancreas, liver, thyroid or gallbladder.
Kleinman said someone new to the keto diet can also experience what’s called the “keto flu” with symptoms like upset stomach, dizziness, decreased energy, and mood swings caused by your body adapting to ketosis.
Is the keto diet bad for you?
Both Condon and Kleinman said they wouldn’t recommend the keto diet to their patients because it is ultimately not realistic or sustainable. The diet restricts fresh fruits and vegetables, whole grains and low fat dairy that can help with long term weight loss and overall health.
“There’s not one diet that’s good for everyone,” Kleinman said. “Do your research, consult a dietitian, discuss with your doctor, and make sure you’re being safe.”
Call the Health and Nutrition Experts atUChicago Medicine Ingalls Memorial at 708-915-8850 to discuss nutrition counseling programs offered to meet your personalized needs.
Sign Up for Our Health & Wellness Newsletter
Our health and science e-newsletter features articles on trending health topics and insight from UChicago Medicine experts.
Subscribe Now 
About Natalie Helms
Natalie Helms is a marketing communications specialist at UChicago Medicine Ingalls Memorial.
Adult GI with Dr. Vijaya Rao: Things You're Too Embarrassed to Ask a Doctor
Things You’re Too Embarrassed To Ask A Doctor is UChicago Medicine’s podcast dedicated to answering some of the most searched medical questions on the Internet. What does it mean if poop is green? This episode, general gastroenterologist Dr. Vijaya Rao explains the source of some questions people have in the bathroom.
Things You're Too Embarrassed to Ask a Doctor Season 1, Episode 5: Adult GI with Dr. Vijaya Rao 
Health and Wellness Related Articles
UChicago Medicine expands its primary care footprint with new facilities and more providers 
Maximizing health and wellness through microbiome research 
When provided personalized health resources, patients often share with others 
Breathe easier: What is a nasal polyp and how is it treated? 
Kids in motion: A pediatrician's tips for getting and keeping kids moving 
Research that reaches out to help 
The Future: Diabetes Youth and Parent Group 
Meet Kovler Diabetes Center's first social worker 
Pursuing accurate diagnosis for minorities with MODY 
UChicago Medicine expands its primary care footprint with new facilities and more providers 
Maximizing health and wellness through microbiome research 
When provided personalized health resources, patients often share with others 
Breathe easier: What is a nasal polyp and how is it treated? 
Kids in motion: A pediatrician's tips for getting and keeping kids moving 
Research that reaches out to help 
The Future: Diabetes Youth and Parent Group 
Meet Kovler Diabetes Center's first social worker 
Pursuing accurate diagnosis for minorities with MODY 
UChicago Medicine expands its primary care footprint with new facilities and more providers 
Maximizing health and wellness through microbiome research 
Previous Next 
Sign up for our Newsletter Enter your email 
Please enter a valid email address.
There was an error while submitting your request. Please try again. If this issue persists, please contact the University of Chicago Medicine.
Subscription Request Successfully Submitted!
Sign Up 
© 2021 The University of Chicago Medical Center. All rights reserved.