 COVID-19: Advice, updates and vaccine options
COVID-19: Advice, updates and vaccine options 
We are open for safe in-person care.
Learn more: Mayo Clinic facts about coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) Our COVID-19 patient and visitor guidelines, plus trusted health information 
Latest on COVID-19 vaccination by site: Arizona patient vaccination updates Arizona , Florida patient vaccination updates Florida , Rochester patient vaccination updates Rochester and Mayo Clinic Health System patient vaccination updates MCHS 
Skip to site navigation Skip to Content 
This content does not have an English version.
This content does not have an Arabic version.
Appointments at Mayo Clinic 
Mayo Clinic offers appointments in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota and at Mayo Clinic Health System locations. Request Appointment 
Is the keto diet for you? A Mayo expert weighs in
Print
Sections 
Products and services 
Free E-newsletter 
Subscribe to Housecall 
Our general interest e-newsletter keeps you up to date on a wide variety of health topics. Sign up now 
Is the keto diet for you? A Mayo expert weighs in
The ketogenic diet is all about eating the right foods in the right proportions. When you get it right, it'll trigger your body to start burning stored fat.
The ketogenic diet gets headlines because celebs like Kim Kardashian West and LeBron James have championed it for weight loss. But what exactly is it, and does the science support the hype?
The ketogenic — or keto — diet emphasizes high-fat foods and severely restricts carbohydrates. In fact, about 60% to 80% of calories should come from fat, according to Jason Ewoldt, RDN, LD, a wellness dietitian at Mayo Clinic Healthy Living Program (HLP). He notes that a true keto diet also includes only moderate amounts of protein, and less than 50 grams of carbohydrates a day.
Interestingly, the keto diet has been around for a long time. Doctors first started using it, Ewoldt says, in the 1920s to treat kids with epilepsy, and it's still sometimes used for that. But today, it is gaining traction for weight loss or to fuel extreme endurance sports like marathon running and triathlons.
How does the keto diet work?
As Ewoldt explains, a typical American diet consists of 50% or more carbohydrates, which convert to glucose in the body. Your cells burn that glucose as fuel. But when you switch to a very high-fat, low-carb diet, your body, by necessity, shifts away from glucose and instead uses fatty acids and ketone bodies for energy. This process is called ketosis — hence the diet's name. 
What foods can you eat?
Ewoldt says nuts, seeds, full-fat cheese and other dairy products, plain Greek yogurt, nonstarchy and fibrous vegetables, oils, along with smaller amounts of meats, eggs and fish, become keto diet mainstays.
You'll need to sharply limit carbohydrates, including bread and baked goods, sweets, pasta, breakfast cereals, starchy vegetables like potatoes, sweet potatoes, corn and peas, beans, fruit, and beer.
Thirsty? Reach for the water bottle, or enjoy some sparking water. Unsweetened coffee and tea also are allowed. Minimize alcohol intake; if you do drink, choose low-carb options (vodka, tequila) and soda water as a mixer.
Does it really work for weight loss?
Yes — but that answer comes with a qualifier. It takes two to three weeks on the diet to start fat burning (ketosis) in the body. So, don't expect instant results. Some studies have shown that adhering to low- or very-low-carbohydrate ketogenic diets helps people lose weight. However, long term there is little difference between a ketogenic diet and a higher carbohydrate diet.
Ewoldt adds a cautionary note: "This is a very restrictive diet that's tough to follow. The average person is not going to keep doing this long term. Also, because the saturated fat content is high, coupled with limited amounts of fruits, vegetables and whole grains, it is not optimal for health."
Why do some athletes follow a keto diet?
Ewoldt explains it like this: "Following a balanced diet that includes carbohydrates, a trained athlete can store about 2,500 calories of glucose, the preferred source of energy. But this same athlete has around 40,000 calories of fat available."
The idea is that by switching to a high-fat diet the body will adapt from using carbohydrates for energy to using fat. Because a vastly greater amount of fat is available, that would, in theory, keep endurance athletes like marathon runners or triathletes going longer. However, athletes do need some carbohydrate to use along with fat for energy. Ewoldt adds that the process of adapting your body from glucose-burning to fat-burning can take several weeks to months.
Share
Tweet
Jan. 03, 2020 
Show references 
Bueno NB, et al. Very-low-carbohydrate ketogenic diet v. low-fat diet for long-term weight loss: A meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. British Journal of Nutrition. 2013; doi:10.1017/S0007114513000548. 
Paoli A. Ketogenic diet for obesity: Friend or foe? International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health2014; doi:10.3390/ijerph110202092. 
Products and services 
Advertisement
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Advertising & Sponsorship 
Policy 
Opportunities 
Ad Choices 
Mayo Clinic Marketplace
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic. 
Try Mayo Clinic Health Letter - get FREE book
NEW - Back and Neck Health
Mayo Clinic on Digestive Health
NEW - Tired Teens - conquering chronic fatigue
Simple, effective Home Remedies
Free E-newsletter 
Subscribe to Housecall 
Our general interest e-newsletter keeps you up to date on a wide variety of health topics. Sign up now 
. 
ART-20457595 
Home 
Is the keto diet for you? A Mayo expert weighs in 
Mayo Clinic Footer
Legal Conditions and Terms
Any use of this site constitutes your agreement to the Terms and Conditions and Privacy Policy linked below. 
Advertising
Mayo Clinic is a nonprofit organization and proceeds from Web advertising help support our mission. Mayo Clinic does not endorse any of the third party products and services advertised.
Advertising and sponsorship policy
Advertising and sponsorship opportunities
Reprint Permissions
A single copy of these materials may be reprinted for noncommercial personal use only. "Mayo," "Mayo Clinic," "MayoClinic.org," "Mayo Clinic Healthy Living," and the triple-shield Mayo Clinic logo are trademarks of Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research.
© 1998-2021 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved. 