 Skip to content 
Live Now
Live Now
FOX 8 News at Noon
Previous Alert 
1 of / 3 
Next Alert Things to know:
Things to know:
See the list: Venues requiring COVID vaccinations, tests
Keto diets are a ‘disease-promoting disaster,’ researchers warn 
News 
by: Chris Melore , StudyFinds.org via Nexstar Media Wire 
Posted: Aug 3, 2021 / 02:19 PM EDT / Updated: Aug 3, 2021 / 02:19 PM EDT 
Red meats are often associated with a keto diet. (Getty Images)
Close 
You have been added to Daily News Newsletter
SUBSCRIBE NOW   Daily News
SIGN UP 
(StudyFinds.org)– Ketogenic diets may be very fashionable right now, but a new study warns they may be doing long-term damage to your health. Researchers say that what makes these high-fat diets different from other weight-loss strategies is also increasing the risk of developing a multitude of different diseases. These include heart disease, cancer, diabetes, and even Alzheimer’s disease.
“The typical keto diet is a disease-promoting disaster,” says lead review author Lee Crosby, RD, nutrition education program manager at Physicians Committee for Responsible Medicine, in a media release. “Loading up on red meat, processed meat, and saturated fat and restricting carbohydrate-rich vegetables, fruits, legumes, and whole grains is a recipe for bad health.”
Masks are back: Stores revise Covid policies 
Crosby and a team from NYU’s Grossman School of Medicine, New York City Health and Hospital at Bellevue, the University of Pennsylvania, Loma Linda University, and George Washington University School of Medicine conducted what the scientists call the most comprehensive review of the keto diet to date. Their findings appear in the journal Frontiers in Nutrition.
What makes the keto diet so different?
A “ketogenic” diet generally refers to any weight loss plan that is very low in carbohydrates, increases protein intake, and is high in fat. You might ask, why would someone think this is a healthy diet? Well, there’s actually a scientific reason for it.
New weight loss product locks up your mouth 
Keto diets are popular because this mix of food fuel tries to trigger ketosis in the body. This process activates the production of ketones, which are an alternative energy source for the body. What makes ketones so appealing is the fact that neurons and other cells can metabolize this energy better than fatty acids. However, the new review finds the foods keto diets use to achieve this may harm the body over the long haul.
Among their findings, study authors say it appears that the keto diet is especially dangerous for pregnant women and those hoping to have children. The study finds that low-carb diets have a link to a greater risk of neural tube defects in the baby. This increased risk remains even if the mother is taking folic acid during her pregnancy.
High-protein keto diets can also hasten the pace of kidney failure in patients with kidney disease. Researchers add the diet raises “bad cholesterol” levels for many dieters as well.
Keto cure-all may have the opposite effect
The team notes that keto diets are often viewed as a potential cure for heart disease and even cancer. However, while some studies find ketogenic diets may starve cancer cells, the new report finds restricting carbohydrates actually tilts a person’s diet towards more cancer-causing foods.
“In addition to the significant risks to kidney disease patients and pregnant women, keto diets are risky for others, too, as these diets can increase LDL cholesterol levels and may increase overall chronic disease risk,” Crosby explains. “While keto can reduce body weight short term, this approach is not more effective than other weight-loss diets.”
Interestingly, study authors did find that a keto diet may reduce the frequency of seizures in some patients dealing with drug-resistant epilepsy.
Suggest a Correction
Your name (required) 
Your email (required) 
Report a typo or grammatical error (required) 
Submit 
Suggest a Correction 
Copyright 2021 Nexstar Media Inc. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed.
More Stories 
US Marshals offering $5K for capture of Akron fugitive released to attend daughter’s funeral 
by fox8webcentral / Aug 20, 2021 
AKRON, Ohio (WJW) -- The US Marshals Service is offering a $5,000 reward for the capture of an Akron man who was released temporarily from prison to attend his daughter's funeral.
34-year-old Joe Fletcher was allowed time outside the facility on August 18 from 9 a.m. until 7 p.m., only visiting the funeral home and a local hall during that time, according to the US District Court.
Read the Full Article 
Biden to address chaotic Afghanistan evacuation amid criticism 
by Associated Press / Aug 20, 2021 
WASHINGTON (AP) — Facing a firestorm of criticism, President Joe Biden plans to speak Friday about the chaotic evacuation of Americans and allies from Afghanistan as the U.S. struggles with obstacles ranging from armed Taliban checkpoints to paperwork problems.
While Biden has previously blamed Afghans for the U.S. failure to get out more allies ahead of this month's sudden Taliban takeover, U.S. officials told The Associated Press that American diplomats had formally urged weeks ago that the Biden administration ramp up evacuation efforts.
Read the Full Article 
Akron police asking for help to find shooting suspect 
by Cris Belle / Aug 20, 2021 
AKRON, Ohio (WJW) -- Akron police are asking for help to find the suspect who shot a 21-year-old sitting in his car in a driveway Thursday night.
Officers, who were called to the 500 block of Vernon Odom Blvd around 9 p.m., found the victim with gunshot wounds and his car riddled with bullets and a handgun nearby, according to a release from Akron police.
Read the Full Article 
Top Stories 
Toxic algae bloom considered in deaths of family of 3, pet dog found in national forest 
6-year-old orca unexpectedly dies at SeaWorld 
Video 
Infectious disease doctor discusses breakthrough infections, delta variant symptoms 
Video 
Mayfield teacher charged with sex crimes pleads not guilty 
Video 
Mike Richards steps down as host of ‘Jeopardy!’ 
Search for missing Medina woman goes international 
Gallery 
Do you earn a living wage in Ohio? Use the tool that calculates the needed income for singles, parents 
Video 
High school football returns with fans 
Video 
Lambda and B.1.621: New COVID variants could be worst yet, doctor warns 
Video 
Local high school football matchups canceled due to COVID-19 
Video 
Hurricane watch issued as Tropical Storm Henri tracks toward New England 
Taliban said to be waiting until after Aug. 31 withdrawal date 
Video 
Read more stories 
More Stories 
Video shows out-of-control car launch into restaurant 
Masks are back: Stores revise COVID policies 
Video 
World’s largest bounce house in North Ridgeville this weekend 
Video 
New Akron police chief sworn-in as department continues to fight violent crime 
Read more stories 
FOX 8 Cleveland Weather // Quick Links: 
Hot on FOX 8 
13-year-old American Airlines passenger duct-taped to seat after in-flight incident, video shows 
Video 
A jolt and a buzz: Alcoholic Mountain Dew coming soon 
Get the munchies with cannabis ice cream 
Vehicle submerged in Colorado pool inspires perfect response from local police 
‘We heard a faint tapping’: Goose finds injured mate at wildlife hospital, waits outside door 
‘It’s time’: Heinz launches campaign to make hot dog and bun counts match 
More Viral 
✕ 
× Close Ad
This website uses cookies
Our Properties use cookies for the performance and functionality of our sites, to personalize content and advertisements, to provide social media features, for analytics, and to provide you with a better experience. By clicking “Accept” or by continuing to use our Properties, you accept the use of cookies. You can learn more about how we use cookies and California residents can exercise their right to opt out of the sale of their data by clicking here.
Accept and Continue 