 Newsletter 
GO 
Please accept our privacy policy
MedicalNewsToday uses cookies to improve your experience and to show you personalized ads. Privacy Policy.
ACCEPT More information
Why is the keto diet good for you?
Medically reviewed by Jillian Kubala, MS, RD — Written by Ana Gotter on January 7, 2020 
A keto diet is an eating plan that focuses on foods that provide a lot of healthful fats, adequate amounts of protein, and very few carbohydrates. The goal is to get more calories from fat than from carbs.
The diet works by depleting the body of its sugar reserves. As a result, it will start to break down fat for energy. This results in the production of molecules called ketones that the body uses for fuel. When the body burns fats, it can also lead to weight loss.
There are several types of keto diet, including the Standard Ketogenic Diet and the Cyclical Ketogenic Diet.
In this article, we explain the benefits of the keto diet, as well as its risks.
1. Supports weight loss
Share on Pinterest 
The keto diet may help a person lose weight.
The ketogenic diet may help 
promote weight loss Trusted Source in several ways, including boosting metabolism and reducing appetite.
Ketogenic diets consist of foods that fill a person up and 
may reduce hunger-stimulating hormones Trusted Source . For these reasons, following a keto diet may reduce appetite and promote weight loss.
In a 
2013 meta-analysis Trusted Source of 13 different randomized controlled trials, researchers found that people following ketogenic diets lost 2 pounds (lbs) more than those following low fat diets over 1 year.
Similarly, another 
review of 11 studies Trusted Source demonstrated that people following a ketogenic diet lost 5 lbs more than those following low-fat diets after 6 months.
Here, learn about the difference between a keto and Atkins diet plan.
2. Improves acne
Acne has several different causes and may have links to diet and blood sugar in some people.
Eating a diet high in processed and refined carbohydrates may alter the balance of gut bacteria and cause blood sugar to rise and fall significantly, both of which can adversely affect skin health.
According to 
a 2012 study Trusted Source , by decreasing carb intake, a ketogenic diet could reduce acne symptoms in some people.
Find out more about acne here.
3. May reduce risk of certain cancers
Researchers have examined the effects of the ketogenic diet in helping prevent or even treat certain cancers.
One 
study Trusted Source found that the ketogenic diet may be a safe and suitable complementary treatment to use alongside chemotherapy and radiation therapy in people with certain cancers. This is because it would cause more oxidative stress in cancer cells than in normal cells, causing them to die.
A 
more recent study Trusted Source from 2018 suggests that because the ketogenic diet reduces blood sugar, it could also lower the risk of insulin complications. Insulin is a hormone that controls blood sugar that may have links to some cancers.
Although 
some research Trusted Source indicates that the ketogenic diet may have some benefit in cancer treatment, studies in this area are limited. Researchers need to carry out more studies to fully understand the potential benefits of the ketogenic diet in cancer prevention and treatment.
For more science-backed resources on nutrition, visit our dedicated hub.
4. May improve heart health
When a person follows the ketogenic diet, it is important that they choose healthful foods. Some evidence shows that eating healthful fats, such as avocados instead of less healthful fats, such as pork rinds, can help improve heart health by reducing cholesterol.
A 
2017 review Trusted Source of studies of animals and humans on a keto diet showed that some people experienced a significant drop in levels of total cholesterol, low-density lipoprotein (LDL), or bad cholesterol, and triglycerides, and an increase in high-density lipoprotein (HDL), or “good” cholesterol.
High levels of cholesterol can increase the risk of cardiovascular disease. A keto diet’s reducing effect on cholesterol may, therefore, reduce a person’s risk of heart complications.
However, the review concluded that the positive effects of the diet on heart health depend on diet quality. Therefore, it’s important to eat healthful, nutritionally balanced food while following the keto diet.
Discover which foods promote heart health.
5. May protect brain function
Some studies, such as 
this 2019 review Trusted Source , suggest the ketones that generate during the keto diet provide neuroprotective benefits, which means they can strengthen and protect the brain and nerve cells.
For this reason, a keto diet may help a person prevent or manage conditions such as Alzheimer’s disease.
However, more research is necessary into a keto diet’s effects on the brain.
Find out more about Alzheimer’s disease.
6. Potentially reduces seizures
The ratio of fat, protein, and carbs in a keto diet alters the way the body uses energy, resulting in ketosis. Ketosis is a metabolic process during which the body uses ketone bodies for fuel.
The Epilepsy Foundation suggest that ketosis can reduce seizures in people with epilepsy — especially those who have not responded to other treatment methods. More research is necessary on how effective this is, though it seems to have the most effect on children who have focal seizures.
A 
2019 review Trusted Source supports the hypothesis that a keto diet can support people with epilepsy. The ketogenic diet may reduce epilepsy symptoms by several different mechanisms.
Discover natural treatments for epilepsy here.
Medical News Today Newsletter
Knowledge is power. Get our free daily newsletter. 
Dig deeper into the health topics you care about most. Subscribe to our facts-first newsletter today.
Enter your email
SIGN UP NOW 
Your privacy is important to us
7. Improves PCOS symptoms
Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is 
a hormonal disorder Trusted Source that can lead to excess male hormones, ovulatory dysfunction, and polycystic ovaries. A high-carbohydrate diet can cause adverse effects in people with PCOS, such as skin problems and weight gain.
There are not many clinical studies on the ketogenic diet and PCOS. One 
pilot study from 2005 Trusted Source examined five women over 24 weeks. The researchers found that a ketogenic diet improved several markers of PCOS, including:
weight loss
hormone balance
ratios of luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH)
levels of fasting insulin
A different 
review of studies from 2019 Trusted Source found that a keto diet had beneficial effects for people with hormonal disorders, including PCOS and type 2 diabetes. However, they did also caution that the studies were too diverse to recommend a keto diet as a general treatment for PCOS.
Learn which foods people with PCOS should eat and avoid.
Risks and complications
The ketogenic diet may have a range of health benefits. However, staying on the ketogenic diet long-term can have 
an adverse effect Trusted Source on health, including an increased risk of the following health problems:
kidney stones
excess protein in the blood
mineral and vitamin deficiencies
a build up of fat in the liver
The keto diet can cause adverse side effects that many people know as keto flu. These adverse effects may include:
These symptoms are especially common at the beginning of the diet as the body adjusts to its new energy source.
Some populations should avoid the keto diet, including:
people with diabetes who are insulin-dependent
people who have eating disorders
those with kidney disease or pancreatitis
women during pregnancy and breastfeeding
People who take a type of medication called sodium-glucose cotransporter 2 (SGLT2) inhibitors for type 2 diabetes should also not follow a keto diet. This medication increases the risk of diabetic ketoacidosis, a dangerous condition that increases acidity in the blood.
Read more on reasons a person might not lose weight on a keto diet.
Takeaway
It is important to discuss any intended diet plan with a doctor, dietitian, or trusted healthcare provider, especially for people who are trying to manage a health problem or disease.
People looking to start the keto diet should seek consultation with a doctor and check if they have diabetes, hypoglycemia, heart disease, or any other health conditions to ensure the keto diet is a safe eating pattern.
Keep in mind that studies on the long-term benefits of the ketogenic diet are lacking. It is unclear whether maintaining this diet over more extended periods is more beneficial than less restrictive healthful eating patterns.
A ketogenic diet restricts or severely limits carbohydrates. However, some carbohydrates provide health benefits. For a less restrictive dietary approach, people should consume a diet that includes a variety of nutrient-dense, fibrous carbs, such as fruits and vegetables, alongside nutritious protein sources, and healthful fats.
Q:
How long can I maintain a keto diet safely?
A:
There is a fair amount of research backing the potential benefits of the ketogenic diet, including weight loss blood sugar regulation. However, 
the majority of studies Trusted Source have only taken place over short periods of a few weeks or months.
Some studies show the benefits of following the ketogenic diet over more extended periods of up to 2 years. However, there is a lack of studies exploring the potential side effects of following a ketogenic diet for longer periods.
One 
recent cohort study Trusted Source that followed 432,179 adults over 25 years associated both high and low carbohydrate intake with a greater risk of mortality than moderate carbohydrate intake. Specifically, people who consumed more than 70% or less than 40% of calories from carbohydrates were at a higher risk of mortality.
While it is likely that you will lose weight when following the ketogenic diet correctly on a short-term basis, research suggests that it is probably not the healthiest diet to follow long-term.
If you want to try the ketogenic diet, it may be best to limit this dietary pattern to 
a few months Trusted Source , then transition back to a less restrictive diet that you can maintain long-term. No matter what diet you follow, remember to make sure you are consuming whole, nutritious foods.
Jillian Kubala, MS, RD Trusted Source Answers represent the opinions of our medical experts. All content is strictly informational and should not be considered medical advice. 
Last medically reviewed on January 7, 2020 
Nutrition / Diet
21 sources collapsed 
Medical News Today has strict sourcing guidelines and draws only from peer-reviewed studies, academic research institutions, and medical journals and associations. We avoid using tertiary references. We link primary sources — including studies, scientific references, and statistics — within each article and also list them in the resources section at the bottom of our articles. You can learn more about how we ensure our content is accurate and current by reading our editorial policy.
Allen, B. G., et al. (2014). Ketogenic diets as an adjuvant cancer therapy: History and potential mechanism.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4215472/ 
Bolla, A. M., et al. (2019). Low-carb and ketogenic diets in type 1 and type 2 diabetes.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6566854/ 
Bueno, N. B., et al. (2013). Very-low-carbohydrate ketogenic diet v. low-fat diet for long-term weight loss: A meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials [Abstract].  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23651522 
D’Andrea Meira, I., et al. (2019). Ketogenic diet and epilepsy: What we know so far.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6361831/ 
Gibson, A. A., et al. (2015). Do ketogenic diets really suppress appetite? A systematic review and meta-analysis [Abstract].  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25402637 
Gomez-Arbelaez, D., et al. (2018). Resting metabolic rate of obese patients under very low calorie ketogenic diet.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5816424/ 
Hallböök, T., et al. (2014). The effects of ketogenic diet on behavior and cognition.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4112040/ 
Klement, R. J. (2019). The emerging role of ketogenic diets in cancer treatment.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30531479 
Kosinski, C., & Jornayvaz, F. R. (2017). Effects of ketogenic diets on cardiovascular risk factors: Evidence from animal and human studies.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5452247/ 
Kossoff, E., & Sirven, J. (2013). Ketogenic diet.  http://www.epilepsy.com/learn/treating-seizures-and-epilepsy/dietary-therapies/ketogenic-diet 
Mansoor, N., et al. (2016). Effects of low-carbohydrate diets v. low-fat diets on body weight and cardiovascular risk factors: A meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials [Abstract]. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26768850   
Masood, W., & Uppaluri, K. R. (2019). Ketogenic diet. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK499830/   
Mavropoulos, J. C., et al. (2005). The effects of a low-carbohydrate, ketogenic diet on the polycystic ovarian syndrome: A pilot study. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1334192/   
McCartney, C. R., & Marshall, J. C. (2017). Polycystic ovary syndrome. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5301909/   
Paoli, A., et al. (2012). Nutrition and acne: Therapeutic potential of ketogenic diets [Abstract]. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22327146   
Rusek, M., et al. (2019). Ketogenic diet in Alzheimer's disease [Abstract]. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/31405021   
Seidelmann, S. B., et al. (2018). Dietary carbohydrate intake and mortality: A prospective cohort study and meta-analysis. https://www.thelancet.com/journals/lanpub/article/PIIS2468-2667(18)30135-X/fulltext   
Stocker, R. K. (2019). [Ketogenic diet and its evidence-based therapeutic implementation in endocrine diseases]. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/31185843   
Ting, R. (2018). Ketogenic diet for weight loss. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6371871/   
Understand your risks to prevent a heart attack. (2016). https://www.heart.org/en/health-topics/heart-attack/understand-your-risks-to-prevent-a-heart-attack[PF1]    
Weber, D. D., et al. (2018). Ketogenic diet in cancer therapy [Abstract]. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5842847/   
FEEDBACK:
Medically reviewed by Jillian Kubala, MS, RD — Written by Ana Gotter on January 7, 2020 
Latest news
EU slow, inefficient, and hampered by bureaucracy in early COVID-19 response
COVID-19: Rare inflammatory syndrome in children examined in new study
Delta variant of SARS-CoV-2: Can vaccine boosters stop its spread?
COVID-19: Fewer deaths in US states with stronger controls
High fat diet, gut bacteria, and heart disease: Exploring the connection
Was this article helpful?
YesNo
Related Coverage
What is a macro diet, and how does it work?
Medically reviewed by Jillian Kubala, MS, RD 
Tracking macros can help some people reach their goals, but it has risks. Learn more.
READ MORE
Could fermented foods improve microbiome diversity?
In a recent study, researchers found that a fermented food diet increased the diversity of the gut microbiome and lowered markers of inflammation.
READ MORE
Foods to eat that are high in protein and low in carbs
Medically reviewed by Katherine Marengo LDN, R.D. 
Low carb, high protein diets may be beneficial for weight loss and muscle building, but they may also carry a few health risks. Learn about low carb…
READ MORE
What foods can you substitute while following the military diet?
Medically reviewed by Grant Tinsley, PhD 
This article explores the military diet, including how it works, substituting foods, and whether or not it is actually safe.
READ MORE
What to know about lacto-ovo-vegetarian diets
Medically reviewed by Kim Chin, RD 
A lacto-ovo-vegetarian diet includes eggs and dairy but avoids other animal products. Learn about the benefits of this diet and what to eat and avoid.
READ MORE
Get our newsletter
Keep up with the ever-changing world of medical science with new and emerging developments in health. 
SUBSCRIBE 
Your privacy is important to us
Health Topics
Health Hubs
Medical Affairs
Content Integrity
Newsletters
Do Not Sell My Info
© 2004-2021 Healthline Media UK Ltd, Brighton, UK, a Red Ventures Company. All rights reserved. MNT is the registered trade mark of Healthline Media. Any medical information published on this website is not intended as a substitute for informed medical advice and you should not take any action before consulting with a healthcare professional. See additional information.
© 2004-2021 Healthline Media UK Ltd, Brighton, UK, a Red Ventures Company. All rights reserved. MNT is the registered trade mark of Healthline Media. Any medical information published on this website is not intended as a substitute for informed medical advice and you should not take any action before consulting with a healthcare professional. See additional information.