 We use cookies to ensure you get the best experience on our website, see our privacy policy for more info. 
OK, got it! 
The Most Complete Keto App
Honestly the app was the best £8.99 I paid to get the knowledge and information I needed for Keto. I have lost so much weight and become so much healthier. All of my physical ailments have gone and it’s not gone unnoticed from family and friends. It initially... Read more
Stephanie , England, UK 
I absolutely love the App and the meals! I’ve introduced my 76 yr. old mother In-law and her friend to it and they love it too! I love the way you can vary the recipes easily and adapt to produce supply especially where I live and still maintain a Keto status!... Read more
Sherrie , Australia 
My fiancé lives in London. I am in Orlando. We are waiting for him to get a visa to live here so we can get married. He sent me your book Quick Keto. He also has the book. We are going to start making recipes together from afar. It’s helping us stay positive... Read more
Linda , Florida, USA 
I cannot sing the praises of the KetoDiet app and calculator enough and am thrilled to give a review. The KetoDiet app is easy to use; has amazing, tested recipes, informative blog and keto articles to ensure success. I trust the information and guidance that... Read more
Henri , North Carolina, USA 
I absolutely LOVE your app; it offers so much information in what I think is a GREAT layout. Before I found this site, I had tried most of the other apps and didn’t really help me - Finally I found yours! Love it! I really love your program, cookbooks and app.... Read more
Brooke , Texas, USA 
I have used the Facebook KetoDiet Support group and the keto app for 2 months and lost 15 lbs, love it! Read more
Rose , California, USA 
How to describe the way this website/way of life has changed my life. In 2019 my weight began to skyrocket. I knew I was 100% addicted to sugar but also felt something was wrong I thought maybe early menopause or just my genes etc. Fast forward to 20kg weight... Read more
Adele , The Netherlands 
I love using the app!! I am allergic to dairy, so I especially love how easily the app allows me to change recipes; it allows me to search for non-dairy alternatives, add them, delete the dairy, and then recalculates the nutrition/calorie count!! It’s awesome! Read more
Pat , Missouri, USA 
I am 80 and have been making changes to my meals for the past year. It has been a challenge since I have dentures, live alone and use a walker which limits my prep time. Yet, I have kept going and persevered losing 15 lbs and enjoying the recipes that folks... Read more
Barbara , California, USA 
I love the app. I put my meals in the app a day in advance which helps keep me on track. Read more
Suzanne , Alabama, USA 
Over 1,600 Recipes
Trialed & tested recipes developed for the KetoDiet app & daily low-carb recipers via our integrated blog
Awesome Planner
Plan your diet in advance to ensure you're eating nutritious food
Track your Progress
Track every aspect of your progress to achieve your goals
Custom Meals & Ingredients
Create your own foods. You can quickly edit, clone & add your foods to any day
Integrated Blog
Our team of experts & recipe developers create amazing content delivered directly to the KetoDiet app
Ketogenic Diet Guide
Our complete guide to the ketogenic diet to help you avoid common mistakes and make healthy choices
Keto Diet App
Our fully featured app provides all you need to plan & track your diet effectively.
Healthline.com best Paleo Apps for 2019
The KetoDiet app helps you reduce your carb intake by adopting a whole-foods approach to nutrition. Learn how to keep your blood sugar levels stable and manage your appetite all while enjoying high-quality food sources. Browse recipes, adjust serving sizes, and review detailed, accurate nutrition facts to stay on track. 
Free download, subscription required to enable premium features
How is Keto Diet Different from Other Apps?
Free content added daily including recipes, articles, expert advice and more. 
Accuracy is crucial for a low-carb diet - we don't crowdsource nutritional data. 
We keep your data private - KetoDiet is not a free app in exchange for your data. 
350
Recipes exclusive to KetoDiet App
1,461
Delicious keto recipes via our blog - plus new content every day!
1.75   M 
Popular foods, branded goods and restaurant meals to choose from to make your tracking easier
247   K 
Lookups for common foods & branded products in the last day
Find out more
iPhone & iPad
Google Play
Free Diet Plans to Get you Started
What's inside our diet plans?
KetoDiet guide in a nutshell including how best to keto, plus what to eat and what to avoid to get the best results 
Delicious easy to follow low-carb recipes 
Ketogenic meal plans with detailed nutrition facts using recipes high in micronutrients 
Print-friendly shopping lists for every week 
Free download 
Keto Diet Blog - Information you can trust
1,461
Recipes available to view & download
196
Expert articles & guides
The KetoDiet blog, which is fully integrated into the KetoDiet apps, is an invaluable source of trusted information for thousands of keto dieters. We work with a team of health professionals to ensure accurate and up-to-date information.
Dr. Nicholas Norwitz
Dr. Nicholas Norwitz is a new shining star in nutrition science. This 25-year-old Ivy League Valedictorian obtained his PhD at Oxford University in just two years and is now pursing his MD at Harvard Medical School. His research expertise is ketosis and brain aging; however, he has published scientific papers on topics ranging from neuroscience to heart disease to gastrointestinal health to genetics to bone health to diabetes.
Franziska Spritzler, RD, CDE
Franziska Spritzler, a registered dietitian and certified diabetes educator, is a strong proponent of carbohydrate restriction for people struggling with diabetes, insulin resistance, obesity, and PCOS. 
Bill Lagakos, Ph.D.
Bill Lagakos has a Ph.D. in Nutritional Biochemistry and Physiology from Rutgers University where his dissertation focused on fatty acid-binding proteins and energy metabolism. He studied inflammation and diabetes at UCSD and most recently, studied circadian biology at the Mayo Clinic.
Valerie Goldstein, MS, RD, CDE
Valerie Goldstein is a Dr. Atkins trained registered dietitian and certified diabetes educator. She is acknowledged in his books, "Dr. Atkins New Diet Revolution" and "Atkins for Life".
Amy Berger, MS, CNS, NTP
Amy Berger, MS, CNS, NTP, is a U.S. Air Force veteran, Certified Nutrition Specialist and Nutritional Therapy Practitioner who specializes in using low-carbohydrate nutrition. 
Emily Maguire, BSc, MSc.
After completion of her BSc in Nutrition, Emily Maguire went onto study for an MSc in Obesity Science and Management. Author at lowcarbgenesis.com, she is keen to share the myths and truths surrounding the ever confusing and interesting topic of nutrition. 
Patricia Daly, BA Hons, dipNT, mBANT, mNTOI
Patricia Daly is a fully qualified Nutritional Therapist (BA Hons, dipNT, mBANT, mNTOI). She is an experienced nutritional therapist and author, specialising in cancer care and the ketogenic diet in particular. She has worked with hundreds of cancer patients in Ireland and abroad, lectures at the Irish Institute of Nutrition and Health and is a well-regarded speaker at conferences and in cancer centres. 
Diana Rodgers, RD
Diana Rodgers is a "real food" nutritionist living on a working organic farm near Boston, Massachusetts. She’s an author, runs a clinical nutrition practice, hosts the Sustainable Dish Podcast, and is an advisory board member of Animal Welfare Approved and Savory Institute.
Our Recipe Developers
When creating recipes for KetoDiet, our recipe developers and I don't focus just on the carbohydrate content: we make sure all recipes are made with whole-food, nutritious ingredients. You won't find any processed junk, unhealthy vegetable oils or artificial sweeteners in our recipes! 
Jo Harding
Jo is the creative food photographer and stylist behind healthy eating blog, Modern Food Stories. Jo's a testament that once you find the right approach for you, you can overcome poor health through the healing power of food. She believes the secret to radiant health starts and ends with a healthy gut so all her recipes are grain, gluten and refined sugar free. Most are also dairy-free.
Lauren Lester
Lauren is the food photographer, recipe developer, and author behind the healthy living website Wicked Spatula. With a focus on mindful and sustainable living she aspires to show her audience that healthy eating doesn't have to be boring, complicated, or tasteless and that healthy living is all about getting in touch with yourself and your surroundings.
Naomi Sherman
Naomi is the force behind Naomi Sherman, Food Creative. She is passionate about recipe development, food photography and styling. An accomplished home cook who was diagnosed with an auto-immune disease eight years ago, Naomi started to explore the connection between healthy, whole food and her symptoms, and a new love was born.
Dearna Bond
Dearna is a passionate foodie and food photographer, and loves sharing her knowledge and enthusiasm for both via her food blog and online photography courses.
Leili Malakooti
Leili is a Graphic designer and Creative Foodie! She is passionate about recipe development, food photography and food styling.
Kim Caruk
Kim Caruk is the food blogger, chef and recipe developer behind Deliciously Keto. Her site is dedicated to sharing Low Carb and Keto recipes along with her inspirational journey to health.
My Story - Martina Slajerova
Hi, I'm Martina, the creator of the KetoDiet blog, KetoDiet app & International best selling author
I love food, science, photography and creating new recipes and I am a firm believer in low-carb living and regular exercise. As a science geek, I base my views on valid research and I have first-hand experience of what it is to be on a low-carb diet. Both are reflected on my blog, in my apps and cookbooks. 
I currently live in the UK. I hold a degree in Economics and worked in auditing, but I have always been passionate about nutrition and healthy living. 
I changed the way I ate in 2011, when I was diagnosed with Hashimoto’s, an autoimmune disease that affects the thyroid. I had no energy, and I found it more and more difficult to maintain a healthy weight. 
That’s when I decided to quit sugar, grains, and processed foods, and to start following a whole-foods-based low carb approach to food. 
My mission is to help you reach your goals, whether it's your dream weight or simply eating healthy food. 
My Bestselling Books
My books will walk you through the guidelines and benefits of the ketogenic diet, and show you how to make more delicious low-carb recipes.
What Experts Say About My Books
Low-carb diets are an invaluable tool in dealing with health conditions such as obesity, diabetes, metabolic syndrome, lipid disorders, epilepsy, and increasingly, cancer. Martina's work, including her blog, book and apps, have been real gems for the low-carb community. Her real-food approach and attention to detail sets her work apart from many others.
Prof. Eugene J. Fine, M.D.
Professor of radiology (nuclear medicine) at the Albert Einstein College of Medicine, ketogenic diet and cancer researcher.
Ketogenic diets have shown great potential in weight loss, overall health and cancer treatment. Martina's valuable contributions to the low-carb community and her involvement in the cancer research project run by our team extend beyond simply helping people follow a healthy low-carb diet. Just like Martina's blog and app, her new cookbook is an amazing resource for anyone interested in healthy living with easy to follow recipes and beautiful photography.
Alex Pearlman Ph.D.
Cancer biologist at the Albert Einstein College of Medicine, ketogenic diet and cancer researcher.
This book is a wonderful combination of the healthy tastes of the Mediterranean and the metabolic benefits of low carb. Plus, top it all off with a description of the science and you get the perfect combination!
Bret Scher, MD.
Cardiologist, lipidoplogist, and medical director at DietDoctor.
I can unequivocally recommend the New Mediterranean Keto approach to dietary wellness based on years of direct personal and professional experience with him and his scientifically validated approach.
Dr. Landon Pryor, MD
This book is incredible! Finally ... a book that combines accurate science with delicious, whole-food recipes to empower people to take control of their health through diet. Get this book!
Chris Palmer, MD.
Harvard psychiatrist and expert on ketogenic diets for mental health.
Innovative recipes that sizzle the palate, plus bite-sized dollops of accessible science to explain why this food will help you regain your health!
Nina Teicholz
Science Journalist and best-selling author of "The Big Fat Surprise".
You’re in good hands with Martina Slajerova and the Ketogenic Diet Cookbook. Not only are her recipes reliable and true to the keto way of life, but they are mouthwateringly delicious. Lifestyle change is hard, but Martina makes it so much easier.
Carolyn Ketchum
Creator of the blog All Day I Dream About Food.
With The KetoDiet Cookbook Martina has really outdone herself. This book is filled with an amazing array of tasty recipes. I especially love the full macronutrient breakdown with each recipe (fat/protein/carbs). This is an invaluable resource for anyone living a low carb high fat lifestyle.
Maria Emmerich
Author of The Ketogenic Cookbook: Nutritious Low-Carb, High-Fat Paleo Meals to Heal Your Body.
Martina's popular KetoDiet blog has been a wonderful resource for those following a healthy paleo/primal low carb diet. Not only does she provide a wealth of information for successfully implementing a ketogenic diet, but also shares many of her own delicious low carb recipes. Her recipes have become staples for those seeking low carb alternatives for their favorite foods. This cookbook with 150 new keto diet recipes is a must for any low carb cook's collection.
Lisa MarcAurele
Creator of Lowcarbyum.com.
As a fellow blogger, I have known Martina for a couple of years. I have been thrilled to see her remarkable development to one of the leading bloggers in this niche. I am delighted to see that her new cookbook is really impressing! With its amazing quality, the book simply stands out from the grey crowd of the numerous low-carb and ketogenic cookbooks. That’s why I am happy to recommend the book to anybody who seeks the latest information about healthy nutrition and the best, carefully developed ketogenic recipes.
Elviira Krebber
Creator of www.lowcarbsosimple.com.
What is Keto?
The ketogenic diet is a high-fat, moderate protein, low-carb diet that causes ketones to be produced by the liver, shifting the body's metabolism away from glucose and towards fat utilisation.
According to over sixty randomized controlled trials carbohydrate restriction is the most effective weight loss tool due to its appetite suppressing effects. The benefits of healthy low carb eating extend beyond weight loss and the ketogenic diet has been used as adjuvant treatment for several health conditions.
Our mission is to help people adopt a healthy lifestyle, not just lose weight. Food quality matters and eating nutritious food low in carbs is the best way to achieve your long-term goals.
Featured in
Home 
We ♥ new friends 
138.4k  
230.1k  
179.0k  
26.0k  
35.8k 
KetoDiet
Low-carb, Keto and Paleo apps, recipes, free guides & tools, and diet plans to help you achieve your goals on the ketogenic diet.
Contact
Contact us 
KetoDiet, PO BOX 2247, Wickford, SS11 9ED, UK
Inspiring. Delicious.
Our emails aren’t your boring low-carb newsletter! 
© Copyright 2012 - 2021 Compumaster Ltd. All rights reserved.
Search 