Features you'll LOVE:
Macro & Exercise Tracker – track your calories, macros and exercise every day – being on a low carb diet is easier than ever! 
Custom Keto Meal Plans – tailored to your body and your goals. 
Thousands of Keto Recipes made by our team, tested, and photographed. 
Keto Calculator – get on track with your low carb diet using our easy-to-use keto calculator. 
Truly Low Carb – our macro tracker includes total or net carbs to make your low carb diet even easier to follow. 
Huge Food Database – hundreds of thousands of foods & tons of low carb recipes available for your keto macro tracker. 
Shopping List – add ingredients from keto recipes or your own ingredients. 
Beginner’s Keto Diet Guide – to help you understand everything about the keto diet and get started with your keto diet immediately. 
Succeeding in your low carb diet has never been easier.
Keto diet planning done for you.
Our customized meal plans eliminate the stress and prep needed to follow your low carb diet successfully and truly make long-term success achievable.
As firm believers in making keto easier, we set out to create a dynamic meal planning system anyone with a smartphone could use. No more recalculating macros or wondering how best to split a recipe's servings – the work is done for you!
Tailored Calories & Macros
Never Run Out of Recipes
Avoid Food Allergens
Export To PDF
Dynamic Shopping Lists
Complete Customization For Each Meal
Hit your goals faster with the FREE Total Keto Diet App!
The Total Keto Diet app is free to download. Track your food, try new recipes, build shopping lists and much more. Start now!
We use cookies to give you the best online experience. By agreeing you accept the use of cookies in accordance with our cookie policy.
Accept Decline 
Privacy Settings 
Privacy Settings saved! 
Total Keto Diet 
Privacy Settings
When you visit any web site, it may store or retrieve information on your browser, mostly in the form of cookies. Control your personal Cookie Services here.
These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems.
Technical Cookies
In order to use this website we use the following technically required cookies
wordpress_test_cookie
wordpress_logged_in_
wordpress_sec
Cloudflare
For perfomance reasons we use Cloudflare as a CDN network. This saves a cookie "__cfduid" to apply security settings on a per-client basis. This cookie is strictly necessary for Cloudflare's security features and cannot be turned off.
__cfduid
These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources, so we can measure and improve the performance of our site.
Google Analytics
We track anonymized user information to improve our website.
_ga
_gid
_gat
Decline all Services 
Accept all Services 