 Self-Care | What Is the Keto Diet and Does It Work? 
https://www.nytimes.com/2020/01/02/style/self-care/keto-diet-explained-benefits.html 
Advertisement
Continue reading the main story
Supported by
Continue reading the main story
Scam or Not
What Is the Keto Diet and Does It Work?
Yes. But we don’t know how effective, or for how long. 
Credit... Photo Illustration by The New York Times 
By Dawn MacKeen 
Published Jan. 2, 2020 Updated Jan. 6, 2020 
A recent survey of registered dietitians named the low-carbohydrate keto diet yet again as the most popular diet in the United States. Powering this diet is fat, and loads of it — all the way up to a hefty 90 percent of one’s daily calories.
Its fans (and marketers) feed social media with before and after photos, crediting the diet for life-altering weight loss or other effects. They swirl butter into their coffee, load up on cheese and eat lonely burgers without their bestie: the bun. Staples like whole grains, legumes, fruit and starchy vegetables are being largely pushed off the plate as devotees strive for ketosis — when the body begins to burn fat instead of glucose as its primary energy source.
Advertisement
Continue reading the main story
Subscribe to The Times to read as many articles as you like. 
nytimes.com/subscription
Site Index
You’ve reached your limit of free articles. Already a subscriber? Log in. 
READER FAVORITE
BASIC SUBSCRIPTION
: 
Get unlimited access for $1.00 a week. 
$3.75 $1.00/week
Billed as $15.00 $4.00 every 4 weeks for one year
SUBSCRIBE NOW 
You can cancel anytime.
https://myaccount.nytimes.com
Buy with 
By buying your subscription with Apple Pay, you consent to our Terms of Service and our Terms of Sale, including the Cancellation and Refund Policy, and you acknowledge our Privacy Policy. You will be automatically charged the introductory rate every four weeks for one year, then the standard rate every four weeks thereafter. Sales tax may apply. You will be charged in advance. Your subscription will continue until you cancel. You may cancel at anytime. Cancellations take effect at the end of your current billing period.
Offer Link 
No commitment required. Cancel anytime. 
Limited time offer. This is an offer for a Basic Digital Access Subscription. Your payment method will automatically be charged in advance every four weeks. You will be charged the introductory offer rate every four weeks for the introductory period of one year, and thereafter will be charged the standard rate every four weeks until you cancel. Your subscription will continue until you cancel. You can cancel anytime. Cancellations take effect at the end of your current billing period. The Basic Digital Access Subscription does not include e-reader editions (Kindle, Nook, etc.), NYT Games (the Crossword) or NYT Cooking. Mobile apps are not supported on all devices. These offers are not available for current subscribers. Other restrictions and taxes may apply. Offers and pricing are subject to change without notice. 
This is an offer for a Basic Digital Access Subscription. The Basic Digital Access Subscription does not include e-reader editions (Kindle, Nook, etc.), NYT Games (the Crossword) or NYT Cooking. Mobile apps are not supported on all devices. These offers are not available for current subscribers. Other restrictions and taxes may apply. Offers and pricing are subject to change without notice. 
© 2021 The New York Times Company HelpFeedback 
Your tracker settings 
We use cookies and similar methods to recognize visitors and remember their preferences. We also use them to measure ad campaign effectiveness, target ads and analyze site traffic. To learn more about these methods, including how to disable them, view our Cookie Policy.  
By clicking "accept", you consent to the processing of your data by us and third parties using the above methods. You can always change your tracker preferences by visiting our Cookie Policy. 
ACCEPT MANAGE TRACKERS 
Subscribe to The Times to read (and print) as many articles as you’d like.  
nytimes.com/subscription 