 What is the Ketogenic Diet? 
Contributors: Barbara Gordon, RDN, LD 
Published May 15, 2019 
Reviewed April 2021 
Dzevoniia/iStock/Getty Images Plus/Getty Images
It’s all the rage. The internet is filled with stories of how everyone from movie stars to ordinary people have shed stubborn pounds with the ketogenic diet. Some suggest that this eating pattern also may be helpful for managing diabetes and warding off Alzheimer’s disease. So, is it a miracle diet or just the latest fad? 
How the Keto Diet Works
The ketogenic diet is a high fat, moderate protein, low carbohydrate eating pattern, which differs from general, healthful eating recommendations. Many nutrient-rich foods are sources of carbohydrates, including fruits, vegetables, whole grains, milk and yogurt. On a keto diet, carbs from all sources are severely restricted. With the goal of keeping carbs below 50 grams per day, keto dieters often consume no breads, grains or cereals. And, even fruits and vegetables are limited because they, too, contain carbs. For most people, the keto diet requires making big shifts in how they usually eat. 
Why does the Keto diet restrict carbs?
Carbs are the main source of energy for our body. Without enough carbs for energy, the body breaks down fat into ketones. The ketones then become the primary source of fuel for the body. Ketones provide energy for the heart, kidneys and other muscles. The body also uses ketones as an alternative energy source for the brain. Hence, the name for this eating pattern.
For our bodies, a ketogenic diet is actually a partial fast. During a total fast or starvation state, the body has no source of energy. Thus, it breaks down lean muscle mass for fuel. With the keto diet, the ketones provide an alternative source of energy. Unlike a full fast, the keto diet helps to maintain lean muscle mass. 
Is the Keto Diet Safe?
This eating pattern is not recommended for individuals with:
Pancreatic disease 
Liver conditions 
Thyroid problems 
Eating disorders or a history of eating disorders 
Gallbladder disease or those who have had their gallbladders removed 
Plus, there are both short-term and long-term health risks for all people associated with the keto diet. Short term health risks include flu-like symptoms. For example, upset stomach, headache, fatigue and dizzy spells. This is called the “keto flu.” Some people also report trouble sleeping.  Cutting back on high-fiber vegetables, fruits and whole grains also can increase risk for constipation. Often keto dieters must take a fiber supplement to help stay regular, but this should be discussed with a health care provider.
Long term health risks of the keto diet include kidney stones, liver disease and deficiencies of vitamins and minerals. To limit carbs, many nutrient-rich vegetables and fruits are cut out. Thus, intakes of vitamin A, C, K and folate usually are low.
The high fat nature of the keto diet is very controversial. A considerable body of research has shown that diets high in saturated fat may increase the risk for heart disease and other chronic health problems. The risk that keto dieters might be taking with regards to their long-term cardiovascular health has not been fully studied.
What the Science Tell Us About the Keto Diet
The keto diet has been used to help manage epilepsy, a disorder characterized by seizures, for more than 100 years. More recent studies are evaluating the keto diet as an alternative dietary treatment for obesity and diabetes. Research findings on the benefits of the keto diet for these health conditions are extremely limited. Studies on effectiveness of the keto diet were conducted with small groups of people. And, most of the research about Alzheimer’s disease relies on research done on lab animals. To fully assess the safety of this eating pattern, more research is needed. Plus, studies must be done on the long-term health effects of the keto diet.  
Body mass index and individual metabolic rates impact how quickly different individuals produce ketones. This means that on the keto diet, some people lose weight more slowly than others — even if they are following the same exact keto diet plan. For this group of people, the keto diet can be frustrating and may impact their motivation for making healthy dietary changes. Plus, many people are not able to stick with the keto diet and gain back the weight after returning to their previous pattern of eating. 
The Bottom Line
The ketogenic diet is quite restrictive. Research supports this eating pattern for epilepsy when managed along with a health care team, since its treatment can be very complex. However, with regards to the keto diet as a tool for weight loss and other health benefits, the jury is still out.   
For a personalized weight management plan that meets your individual needs, consult a registered dietitian nutritionist. An RDN can create a personalized weight loss program based on your unique health and nutrition needs and goals. To find a dietitian in your area, search the Academy's Find an Expert database.
Freshly Picked
Food Shopping Safety Guidelines 
Breastfeeding Basics for New Moms Breastfeeding Basics for New Moms 
Sand, Surf and Great Eats Sand, Surf and Great Eats 
6 Tips to Lighten Your Carbon Foodprint 6 Tips to Lighten Your Carbon Foodprint 
Keep Kids Out of the Clean Plate Club Keep Kids Out of the Clean Plate Club 
Happier Meals for Kids at the Drive-Thru Happier Meals for Kids at the Drive-Thru 
Be a Savvy Farmers Market Shopper Be a Savvy Farmers Market Shopper 
Exercise Safely in Hot Weather Exercise Safely in Hot Weather 
Explore...
Apple-Blueberry Crumble Recipe 
Find Nutrition Experts 
Need serious help making a plan? The nutrition experts in our professional membership are ready to help you create the change to improve your life.
Find a Nutrition Expert 
True 
This website uses cookies.
We use cookies to optimize and personalize your experience, provide relevant content and analyze online traffic. We also share information with our analytics and website partners, who may use it to inform decisions about current or future services. By clicking “Agree,” you consent to use cookies if you continue to our website. You can manage your cookie settings by clicking the "cookie preferences" button.
I Agree Cookie Preferences 
This website uses cookies.
We use cookies to optimize and personalize your experience, provide relevant content and analyze online traffic. We also share information with our analytics and website partners, who may use it to inform decisions about current or future services. By clicking “Agree” below, you consent to use cookies if you continue to our website.
You can customize your cookie preferences by using the settings next to "Analytical Cookies" and "Marketing Cookies." Click the "Save Preferences" button to save your customized settings. You can access and change your cookie preferences at any time by clicking "Data Protection Settings" icon in the lower left corner of our website. For more detailed information on the cookies we use, please visit the Academy's  Privacy Policy .
I Agree 
Necessary Cookies
Necessary cookies enable core functionality. The website cannot function properly without these cookies, and can only be displayed by changing your browser preferences.
Marketing Cookies
Analytical cookies help us to improve our website by collecting and reporting information on its usage.
Social Cookies
We use some social sharing plugins, to allow you to share certain pages of our website on social media. These plugins place cookies so that you can correctly view how many times a page has been shared.
Save Preferences 